Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm here with the return guest, Doctor Steve
Stewart Williams. He's professor of psychology at the University
of Nottingham, Malaysia. And today we're going to talk
about his new book A Billion Years of Sex
Differences, How Evolution shaped the Minds of Men and
Women. There it is, the printed version. So Dr.
Stuart Williams, welcome back to the show. It's always
a pleasure to talk with you. Thanks, Ricardo.
Thanks a lot. It's great to be back.
OK, so let's start with some basic questions here
because, you know, this topic of sex differences and
sex and gender, uh, there's lots of confusion sometimes
when people have these discussions. So uh what do
you mean by sex differences in your book?
Uh, WELL, I'm talking about sex differences, um, I'm
talking about average differences between biological males and biological
females, and I'm making no assumptions about the, uh,
the origins of those differences. So if I call
a difference a sex difference, I'm not implying that
it's, uh, due to nature or nurture or any
combination of, of those things. Uh, MOST of the
time it is due to a combination of both,
at least for the, the particular sex differences that
I discussed, but, um, but there's no assumption there,
uh, inherent in that labeling, um. And yeah, the
kind of differences that I talk about in the
book, um, include sex differences in sexual behavior, uh,
and mate preferences, sex differences and aggression, risk taking,
sex differences in parenting, personality, uh, career-related interests, health,
mental health, etc.
And how do you deal with the topic of
gender, because there are scientists that distinguish between the
sex and gender. That's very common, for example, among
anthropologists, uh, I mean, particularly cultural anthropologists, but many
biological anthropologists also distinguish between sex and gender. I
mean sex being basically uh what we could call
biological sex. I mean biological differences between males and
females and gender being the social, uh, expression of,
uh, what we usually call men and women. Of
course, there could be in certain, uh, at, at
least in certain societies, different gender categories that it's
not just men and women, but, uh, for gender,
for example. So how do you deal with gender
in your understanding?
Um, WELL, I typically, I don't find it a
hugely useful concept. So I tend not to use
it too much, um, for several reasons. Uh, ONE
major reason is that, um, I think that the
concept of gender isn't really just one concept, it's
multiple concepts. Um, SO people mean different things by
gender, uh, when, when they use the term different
people mean different things, the same person will often
mean somewhat different things by gender at different times.
So sometimes it means, like you said, the social
expression of um of, Like male female categories or
sometimes multiple categories, um, or perhaps sort of clusters
of personality traits that are associated with male or
female, but then maybe you have other categories as
well. Um, SOMETIMES people just use it as a
synonym for biological sex. Uh, SOMETIMES people are referring
to the social roles of the culture or stereotypes
of the sexes. Sometimes people will describe a male-female
difference as a gender difference. If they're trying to
imply that it's a learned difference rather than a
difference with, you know, like a, like a natural
or evolved difference. So multiple different definitions makes it
really quite tricky to know what people are talking
about when they use the term. Uh, THAT'S one
problem with it. Uh, ANOTHER problem is that a
lot of the, Specific definitions that people use, I
think have problems of their own. So if we're
gonna label a male-female difference, a gender difference, if
it's a result of, of learning, socialization, and culture,
well, well, for a start, people often label it
as a way to, um, To make the point
that it is learned rather than innate without actually
showing that it is the case. It sometimes seems
to be a way to settle that argument without
actually providing arguments and evidence. Um, AND most of
the differences that are of interest to us and
that I talk about in the book, uh, most
of the differences are partly due to nature and
partly due to nurture. And therefore, if we're going
to use the, the sex as biology. Gender is
social learning, uh, way of thinking about things, that
means that we're going to have to call most
male-female differences part gender difference and part sex difference.
And that's a really awkward way to construe things.
I think it's much easier just to label them
as sex differences, as an average differences between biological
males and females, and then with, like, like I
said before, without an implication that they're due to
either nature, nurture, or a bit of both. And
then to address the nature nurture question separately. And
actually, things as we were talking about the, um,
the notion of gender as sort of clusters of
personality traits, um, I also think that's a little
bit of a problematic definition as well, given that,
um, The kinds of differences that we're talking about
with that definition, so, so like people will say,
like men are typically assertive and, uh, domineering, uh,
for instance, women, women are typically nurturing and caring,
for instance, um, we're talking about that, well, really
we're talking about personality, and there's so much variation
in personality in every single individual. That if we're
going to define gender that way, basically every different
individual is their own unique gender, and really we
are talking about personality, rather than talking about anything
necessarily connected to sex.
Mhm, I understand. I guess that we will come
back to some of what you said there when
we talk about cross cultural evidence for sex differences
and how people interpret and deal with that evidence,
but let me ask you now, why do you
think it is important to study sex? Differences, I
mean, uh, for you, uh, do you think it's
just, uh, I mean, it's just science, it's just
intellectual curiosity, it's just a matter of knowledge, or
can it have other sorts of, for example, social,
political implications?
Well, I think both, for me, uh, first and
foremost, the reason I'm interested in the topic is
that I just find it deeply, deeply fascinating. I
just, um, find it enthralling really. I remember when
I first, uh, came across evolutionary psychology, it was
in a book called The Moral Animal by, uh,
by Robert Wright, and it was really the explanation
for the evolutionary explanation for sex differences in humans
and in, and other species. That's what really grabbed
me and really, uh, turned me on to evolutionary
psychology. And, uh, I remember it was, it was
a lot like when I was a kid. Uh,
AND I first understood how the phases of the
moon worked. And You just suddenly understand. This phenomenon,
just suddenly all clicks into place and you understand
it, and you have that kind of uh exhilarating
rush of, of insight. Um, IT was the same
thing when I understood the evolutionary explanations for sex
differences, and, uh, you know, I had that rush
of insight, uh, that they were click, and if
anything though, I guess it was even more exhilarating
in this case because it was about something that
It's really relevant to people in their everyday lives.
We all, we all notice the sex differences around
us. We all interact with both sexes, so it's
a very uh very relevant topic for, for people
in general and for myself. And suddenly there was
this way of shedding light on some of the
differences that we all notice between men and women.
So that's, that really is the main reason. That
said, I do think that all knowledge is useful.
Knowledge about a topic that is so important to
so many people could be particularly useful. Uh, USEFUL
in our personal lives, uh, useful as well for,
uh, steering policy and, and, uh, and the like,
as I'm sure we'll come to later.
Yes, we'll come to that, we'll come back to
that topic later. Uh, AND what do you think
are the most rigorous ways of studying sex differences?
And establishing to what extent they are the result
of nature or environmental factors, learning, and so on,
or on the other hand, the result of nature,
I I I think I said nature earlier, I
meant nurture, or on the other hand, nature and
more the result of biology and perhaps pointing to
some innate differences between the sexes.
Yeah, uh, well, there are, there are a few
different lines of evidence that I think can shed
light on this question of, um, the extent to
which the differences are due to nature versus nurture.
Um, I, I named six in the book, and,
uh, let's see if I can remember what they
are. So, uh, the first one is the developmental
timing of the differences. So often you'll find that
a sex difference appears very, very early on, um,
and often so early on that it becomes somewhat
implausible to assume that it's just down to socialization.
At, at least it sort of shifts the balance
of probabilities to the idea that maybe, There's an
innate push as well, if it, if it turns
up really, really, uh really, really early, aggression, for
instance, turns up, uh, the sex difference in aggression
turns up, as soon as kids are mobile enough,
that aggression is an option, uh, greater energy levels,
sort of greater physical activity, um, Like, like, it's
tends to be somewhat higher among boys and girls,
that appears very, uh, very early as well, um,
and also puberty, so some, some traits, Are they
either don't appear very, very early on, or they're
quite small early on, but often sex differences will
get larger or, or first appear at puberty, and
that can be a result of socialization, of course,
but it's also a telltale sign that maybe, um,
that it has an evolutionary origin because a lot
of male-female differences appear at puberty, and in fact,
that's part of the definition of puberty.
So if something, if something is the result of,
uh, evolutionary pressures and they are, and we're talking
about adaptations, it's not necessarily the case that they
have to come online from birth, right? I mean
they can come online in later. Later stages in
life, but if they consistently show differences between men
and women, boys and girls, and they come online
more or less around the same time period, then
they can still refer to or be adaptations.
Yeah, they can do, and there is, of course,
I, I can hear people saying yes, but they
could also be. Due to, uh, different socialization pressures
at, you know, during the teenage years as well.
And, and that is true. So I think that
is suggestive, but we need other evidence as well.
Um, SO another line of evidence is that, uh,
a lot of sex differences are very, very consistent
across, across historical periods. So for instance, uh, the
sex difference in, uh, sex differences in mate preferences.
Uh, WHICH I'm sure we'll discuss later on. They,
uh, have been found consistently throughout the 20th century
and into the 21st century. Um, THEY have just
remained intact, like within the US, for instance, despite
the, the radical social changes during that time. So
too have sex differences in, in interests and career-related
interests, um, they, which I'm sure we'll also discuss
later on. These are some of the more important
things that we discussed, that I, that I discussed
in the book, um. And that persisted throughout time,
and that, that as well as suggestive evidence that
we're dealing not with just a social phenomenon, uh,
but with something that's deeper seated and sort of
harder to shift. Uh, ANOTHER, um, effect that we
find is that a lot of these sex differences
persist even in the face of social pressures, pushing
in the opposite direction. Uh, SO for instance, um,
typically, like in most societies, parents and teachers and,
and other authority figures, they tend to clamp down
on aggression, they tend not to think that, they
tend not to encourage it. Um, BUT to clamp
down on it instead, and they're actually more likely
to tell boys that they shouldn't be aggressive than
to tell girls that they shouldn't be. It's not
because they approve more of girls' aggression, it's just
simply because boys are more aggressive, that they're more
often aggressive and therefore, uh, we more often tell
them off for being aggressive. Uh, DESPITE the fact
though, that there's more pressure on boys than girls
not to be aggressive, boys are consistently more aggressive
across all cultures, um. So that's the 3rd line
of evidence, 4th line of evidence is, uh, associations
between hormonal exposure and behavior. Um, THE links between
blood levels of hormones and behavior, like current blood
levels of hormones and behavior, you know, aggression, risk-taking,
people think that that means high testosterone at the
time, those links are actually very, very weak. Um,
WHERE there is much stronger evidence is that there
seem to be associations between prenatal hormonal exposure and
later behavior. So higher levels of exposure to testosterone
in the womb tend to be associated with higher
levels of aggression and, and risk taking, uh, among,
among adult, adult humans, um, adult other mammals as
well, um, and, and lower levels of parental care,
and various other findings along those lines. Uh, THE
fifth line of evidence is cross-cultural universality or, or
cross-cultural near universality in some cases, depending on the
sort of strength I guess of the innate push.
Um, AND a lot of these sex differences that
we've been talking about and that I discussed in
the book. Across cultural universals, basically, so I like
aggression, the aggression sex difference is just found wherever
you, wherever in the world you look, uh, the
risk-taking sex difference found wherever in the world you
look. Sex differences and mate preferences are found in
most places where we've looked, some of them in
all places, some of them in most places, uh,
and, and so on, but the fact that women
provide more of the parental care is found in
all known cultures, including modern cultures where we actually
have an alternative. Uh, WAY that women could, uh,
women or, or guys could, uh, feed the young,
other than nursing them, we have, you know, we
have baby formula, and we have ideals, uh, of
both sexes, both parents pulling their own weight, and
so even in our own culture, we still find,
uh, that sex difference. Uh, AND then the final
one, which is maybe my favorite, uh, my favorite
one is, uh, cross-species evidence. So for a lot
of these sex differences, you also find the same
differences in many other species. You don't find them
in all other species, um, but I think quite
importantly, you find them specifically in species that have
been subject to the same selection pressures as our
species has over evolutionary time. Um, WHICH I'm sure
we'll discuss those selection processs later, uh, but yeah,
you find them particularly in those species, which I
think is very, very meaningful. Um, AND, and, uh,
and yeah, really points to an innate contribution in
our species as well. It just seems unlikely if
you find this a difference in aggression, say, or
in parenting in many other species, then you find
the same difference in our own species, just seems
unlikely that it's purely due to, The social causes
in our case, whereas you know, it's obviously in
other species, it's due to natural selection, but then,
uh, for some strange reason, we coincidentally have the
same differences in our species, but for a completely
different reason. This seems uh logically possible but unlikely.
Yeah, we will certainly discuss in more detail some
of those, or at least most of those sources
of evidence that you pointed out there. Let me
ask you, uh, in the book at a certain
point you call some people minimizers of sex differences
and other people exaggerators of sex differences. Of course
I'm not saying that most people. Following one camp
or the other. There are also people who have
a more balanced view of sex differences, and we're
going to talk about that. But what do you
mean by those terms, minimizers and exaggerators, and what
do you understand as being someone who minimizes sex
differences or on the other hand, someone who exaggerates
sex differences?
Well, someone who minimizes them is somebody who Uh,
tries to play down the extent to which men
and women differ from each other. Um, IF not
to sort of deny that there are differences. If
there's, if there, you know, small differences, then maybe
you could actually make the case that the difference
doesn't really exist, that it's just a stereotype. Um,
AND I think they, they seem to be particularly
uncomfortable. With any suggestion that any differences that we
find have an innate basis, that they're not just
100% due to socialization. So it tends, I think,
to come out of a discomfort with male female
differences and a sort of desire to minimize them,
maybe even deny them, but certainly to deny that
they have, uh, evolved roots. Uh, THE exaggerators on
the other hand, um, they, they do the opposite,
and they are inclined to think that men and
women are from Mars and Venus, they're just massively
different from each other. And there's little if any
overlap between them, um, and sometimes they'll also hold,
not only that the differences are really, really big,
but that they should be big, and that men
should be like this and women should be like
that, and that it's kind of going against nature
or going against God to have, to have exceptions
to the rule. Uh, SO, yeah, that's what that
means by minimizers and exaggerators. I think clearly I
think that the truth is somewhere in between, that
most human sex differences are, they're not huge, they're
also not non-existent, we're sort of modestly dimorphic. Compared
to most other, uh, compared to most other mammals,
but we are somewhat dimorphic, there are some degree
of, of, evolved sex differences in our species.
Mhm. Yes, and later we're going to talk about
what are some of the big sex differences, some
of the smaller sex differences, and the ones that
fall more or less in between. Uh, BUT before
we get into that, uh, I think that it's
also important for us to address. He, uh, 4
different biases that you talk about, uh, in your
book. You mentioned the alpha bias, the beta bias,
the gamma bias, and the delta bias. Could, could
you explain each of those biases and why it's
important for us to keep them in mind?
Yeah, sure. Um, SO the alpha bias is the
tendency to exaggerate sex differences, um, and that is
found among, I guess, sort of, uh, In traditional
religions, that's quite common, uh, modern day conservatives, that's
quite a common approach, you exaggerate them. I have
to say that, um, within my own field of
evolutionary psychology, I think we've sometimes been guilty of
overstating the size of the differences in our species,
and those are all examples of that, of the
alpha bias. Um, THE beta bias is the reverse,
so that is the tendency to, to minimize or
deny sex differences, uh, and that I think is,
Very, very common, it's very, very common in academia
and in journalism and in education, um, and I
guess, you know, it's very, very common in the,
the Western world, the, the weird world, if you
like. I think it's historically quite an obelisk, um,
but it does seem to be pretty common and,
yeah, pretty common, uh, in among the chattering classes,
if you like. Um, I think in some ways
it's a response to the alpha bias. Uh, AND,
and the harm's done by exaggerating sex differences and
moralizing sex differences, some folks have gone in the
other direction. Um, SO it's more common among progressives,
generally, so the beta bias generally more common among
progressives, but there are exceptions, so when it comes
to things like the pay gap, for instance, um,
progressives are likely to, uh, flip from the, the
beta bias to the alpha bias, if you see
what I mean, so they downplay most sex differences,
but then, uh, when it comes to, Certain politically
relevant differences like, like the gender pay gap, uh,
there, there they don't play them down, if anything
they play them up instead. So it's alpha and
beta, the gamma bias is another one that you
find among academics and journalists and the like, um,
commonly, and that is the tendency to highlight sex
differences where women do better than men. And play
down sex differences where on average men do better
than women. Um, AND also to highlight differences where
women are disadvantaged and need help, and play down
differences where men are disadvantaged and need help. Uh,
AND I think that's a reaction to the fact
that we've kind of done the opposite through a,
through a lot of human history. Um, WE have
sort of painted males as great and awesome and
as superior to females, and this is kind of,
um, trying to set the record straight, but arguably
going, uh, doing so by, um, introducing, by, by
not getting rid of bias, uh, but instead by
sort of reversing the bias and just focusing in
on areas where women do better. And it comes
out of, I think, of a protectiveness of, of
women, uh, as well. Uh, AND then the final
one is, is the delta bias, and that is
a tendency, again among certain progressive circles in particular,
to really try to highlight anything that goes against
traditional sex differences. So, for instance, um, the delta
bias, you would see that for instance if people.
Uh, KIND of cheerleading, uh, females, women sleeping around
while, uh, criticizing men for sleeping around. So sleeping
around's great if women do it, very, very bad
if men do it. Being a stay at home
parent, great if men do it, that's really cool,
but it's a bad thing if women do it.
Um, SO it's just kind of the traditional things
but turned on their head and we're trying to
emphasize the opposite in reaction to the traditional ways.
Mm. And in the book, you also, when it
comes to the nature nurture debate surrounding sex differences,
you identify five different kinds of positions that people
can have. So I mean, I mean their names,
they are more or less self-explanatory, but you can
explain them further if you want. So the first
one is basically what we commonly call biological. DETERMINISM,
so it's a nature only position. Then there are
people who fall more in the camp of mainly
nature position. And then there's the nature and nurture
as equal partners, so more or less 50/50 nature
and nurture. And then the mainly nurture position and
then what we could call environmental determinism, which is
Which stands at the opposite end of the spectrum
from biological determinism and it's the nurture only position.
So, I mean, would you like to explain them
a little bit better and uh why do you
think that we should keep these positions in mind
that people might have when we think about sex
differences?
Uh, YEAH, so that's, yeah, that's how I laid
it out. So, spanning everything from the nature only
to the nurture only. Um, I think that a
lot of folks assume that evolutionary psychologists like myself
take a, a nature-only position on sex differences. Um,
BUT I think that basically none of them do.
I think almost no one takes a nature on
your position these days. Uh, THE position would be
basically just sex differences, uh, largely set in stone.
Largely set in stone, you know, and, and without
brain surgery or some, or a blow to the
head or something like that, basically they're going to
be, um, We're gonna find them no matter what,
and the size is going to be invariant across
cultures and variant across different uh social influences. So
yeah, I think, I think almost no one holds
that view. The one exception I guess would be
that, um, that most people, I would say take
a uh nature only view for sexual orientation. And
so if they're thinking for instance about same-sex sexual
orientation, um, they would tend to say that that
is. A nature only difference or or something close
to it. Um, THEN, yeah, and then at the
other end of the spectrum you've got the, the
nurture only position. Now some people will say that's
a straw man view, uh, and that no one
holds that view either. I personally think that that's
not the case. I've sort of, I say in
the book I've got 3 stock responses when, when
that claim is made. So sometimes I'll argue, like
I'll, I'll argue online or, uh, In a journal
article that here's, here are these lines of evidence,
the six lines of evidence I mentioned before, that
a given sex difference is not just due to
nurture, and a common response is, well, no one
says it's all due to nurture. And that's just
a straw man, just like it's a straw man
to say that, uh, evolutionary psychologists think it's all
due to nature. Uh, MY first response to that
is, OK, great. So you're, you're agreeing with me
that it's partly due to nurture, cool. So, so
we're, we're in agreement. Perfect. Uh, MY second response,
Is that even if that were true, even if
it were true that everyone agrees that every single
sex difference that's worth talking about is partly due
to nature, I think we should still make the
case that that is, that that is true. We
shouldn't just accept it without arguments and evidence. Uh,
BUT then my third argument is that I just
don't think that it actually is true that, No
one claims, uh, that certain sex differences are just
basically due to nurture rather than nature. You know,
sometimes people will explicitly say this difference is due
to nurture, it's got nothing to do with nature.
Uh, SOMETIMES people will. Kind of agree that yeah,
sure, nature and nurture is involved in everything, no
worries, but then they'll just only focus on the
nurture side of the equation, as if, um, they'll
they'll tacitly act as if it's all down to
nurture. Uh, SOMETIMES people will say, uh, well, the
nature nurtured dichotomy is not a, you know, it's
a, it's a false dichotomy and we can't split
it into those two things. I, I do notice
though that they only do that when somebody mentions
a nature explanation. They don't do it when somebody
mentions a socio-cultural explanation. They don't say, well, well,
well, well, hold your horses with that socio-cultural explanation,
uh, because actually the nature nurture dichotomy is, is
false. They only do it for the one, not
the other. Uh, SO those are the two extremes.
In between is where I think, uh, almost every
sex difference is going to be found, um, you
know, I think possibly there, I'm sure there are
some cases of nurture only sex differences. Maybe the
names that, that people have, individuals have within a
given culture, probably not innate contribution to that, right?
But in general, the sex differences that are, are
of interest to us and that are focused on
in the books, and the book, um, I think
are just due to a combination of nature and
nurture. Um, NOW, yeah, so it's spanning within that
range, right, the the more realistic range it's spanning
from mainly nature to equal partners to mainly nurture.
And I'm sure, I guess one thing I should
emphasize is that these are not five positions that
people can take on every single sex difference. I
think actually that um we would apply different ones
to different sex differences. Now, for the ones that
I'm discussing in the book, like uh sex differences
and sexual behavior and mate preferences, aggression, risk taking,
Uh, parenting and so on, I think that I
would, I would say that most of those are
mainly nature. Or nature and nurture as equal partners.
The reason I say that, so, so the mainly
nature position is that, Culture can shift things around
and it can expand or contract sex differences, but
they're really quite sturdy, and they're sturdy enough that
you're gonna find them basically in every culture or
in the vast majority of cultures. It's gonna take
really quite a cultural push to get rid of
them, so we're gonna find them in most cultures.
Uh, AND I think that's true of most of
these uh sex differences that we're talking about. They,
they do seem to be very, very persistent across
cultures. So I would say yeah, so, so most
of these sex differences. Mostly, mostly, uh, mostly nature
or at best nature and nurtures equal partners. I
think there are many fewer where it's mostly nurture.
And uh maybe just one other thing I, I'll
add is that the mostly nurture category would be
that you, you see people staking that claim when
they say, OK, sure, there might be a little
bit of a push, a little bit of an
innate push early on in life. Um, BUT then
it's, it's amplified by culture. Um, AND it doesn't
have to be, it could just as equally be
minimized by culture or even completely eliminated by culture.
Mhm. Uh, SO do you think that from a
scientific perspective, all of these five positions can play
a role or be useful to some extent depending
on the sex difference we are looking at?
I do, I do think they can be. Um,
I just think that. Uh, IT'S gonna sort of
cluster around mainly nature and nature and nurtures equal
partners. I think there'll be more sex differences that
fall into, into those camps, but there'll be some
that fall into all the different camps.
Mhm. So, there are two sources of evidence that
you point to in your book that I would
like to discuss a little bit with you. So
at a certain point you talk about behavioral genetics,
and I would like to ask you this because
I've had conversations on the show over the years
with prominent behavioral geneticists like Robert Plomin, Eric Turkheimer,
and others. Others and I mean they told me
that when it comes to group differences, particularly behavioral
genetics is not a very good tool to study
those because what people do in behavioral genetics is
that they study individual differences among a particular population
in a given environment. So the behavioral genetics would
not be a very good tool to study differences
between groups of people, but rather be across individuals
in a given population. I mean, uh, do you
also have that understanding or and if not, uh,
in what ways do you think that it can
still be useful to study sex differences?
I do have that understanding. I think they're. Almost
always, it's almost always the case that uh behavior
genetics applies to individuals, um, and, and to explaining
the nature and nurture of individual differences, rather than
average differences between groups, um, or nations, uh, and,
and that would generally include the sexes as well.
Um, BUT the one place where I do think
that it can shed some light on sex differences
concerns a, a generalization that's come from behavioral genetics
research, which is, uh, named by Eric Turkheimer, the
second law of behavior genetics. So the second law,
uh, states that the effect of sharing a home,
sharing a family home as a kid, um, has
less impact on, uh, individual differences. Um, THAN the
effect of the genes. Genes have more impact in
shaping individual differences than sharing a home does. Um,
AND more specifically, um, the, the finding is that
sharing a family home doesn't make people much more
similar than they would be if they hadn't grown
up together. So get a couple of identical twins,
uh, they grow up in the same home, compare
them to a couple of identical twins who are
separated at birth and grow up in separate homes.
You'd expect that the ones who grow up together
would be more similar to each other because they've
been separate to all the same, uh, or, or
many of the same, uh, family, uh, you know,
uh variables and and situations. Um, IN childhood they
often are quite similar to each other, or like
more similar to each other, but by adulthood they're
often not much more similar, or depending on the
variable, they're sometimes no more similar at all. Um,
AND the lesson there basically seems to be that
within the normal range, so we're not talking about
neglect or, uh, abuse, within the normal range, um,
the family home has less impact in shaping how
we turn out than we typically think. That applies
to individuals, but I do think that, It has
implications for the discussion of sex differences as well,
because among the most common explanations for sex differences
are that they're a product of the family home,
of, of parenting practices and the like. And the
reason that the second law of behavior genetics is,
is important here is that it kind of says,
well, It seems that parenting doesn't have a big
impact on how people turn out, and that just
sort of undercuts the idea that parenting has a
big impact in terms of how males, males and
females turn out. You know, it's a, it's an
extrapolation from that, it doesn't directly come out of
behavior genetics, but um it seems to me to
be a plausible extrapolation from it that suggests that
more than likely, in the normal range, parenting behavior
is not gonna have a huge impact in terms
of how, uh, the, the differences between boys and
girls and especially men and women.
Mhm. Yeah, but, but then you acknowledge that behavioral
genetics when it comes to the study of sex
differences is not one of the best tools out
there for the reasons we discussed here.
Yeah, I do, I do think so, because it's
looking for the, the nature and nurture of individual
differences, and what they typically find is that, um,
individual differences are shaped. By nature and nurture in
both sexes and to usually to a roughly similar
degree.
So, and when it comes to the cross cultural
evidence, I mean, one thing I would like to
say and for you to comment on is, uh,
do you think that we've studied or people looked
at enough data across all the societies that we've
studied because we've had We've been basically studying thousands
of different human societies for the past, roughly the
past 5 centuries or so. And for example, there's
an ethnographic atlas with more than 1200 societies covered
there. And I mean, at least what I hear
from anthropologists. IST s is that when it comes
to knowing through this sort of evidence, cross cultural
evidence, whether sex differences are universal versus culturally variable
or for example, socio ecologically variable or contingent that
no one really. There has done the work of
digging through those tens of thousands or thousands of
ethnographic reports to really conclude one way or the
other. I mean, what do you think about that?
Yeah, that's interesting. Um, I certainly think that, uh,
you know, more, more work could be done, and
systematically looking at that. Um, I definitely had the
impression though that, well, well, a few things, so
I think that um, There's a ton of variability
across different cultures in, in every way that you
care to name, including in the exact details of
how men and women, women behave and, and the
way, the ways that the roles are divvied up
between men and women. A lot of variation, um,
Especially in the specifics, but when you get into
uh sort of more general categories of behavior, things
like aggression and parenting, for instance, I think, I
don't think anyone's made a compelling case, despite, I
think a lot of people wanting to be, to
be able to, that the differences are found in
some cultures but not others. I think uh those
differences, in particular, that that is found very, very
consistently. There's no culture on record that uh where
for instance, Women are more aggressive than men, where
women band together to form war parties to go
off and attack other groups of women and, and,
um, kidnap the men, which is a common thing
that happens in, in reverse, in the uh anthropological
record. Uh, NO plausible cases of cultures where it's
the men who are the primary caregivers consistently for,
for the kids, um. You know, these, these things
just recur again and again and again, and occasionally
you will, you'll hear claims, uh, anthropologists for instance,
will make claims about some society, some exotic society
where things are, are very different and things are
done in a very, like the reverse of how
we're used to seeing them in Western societies. But
almost inevitably they just fall apart on closer examination,
and you find that actually, we do find that
at a deeper level, we do find the same
sex differences. Um, NO, like you said, there's, there's
more work to be done, uh, in going through
all these, um, hundreds and hundreds of ethnographies. But
a lot of work has been done already, there
are, there are people who have looked across um
ethnographies. And they've done so with all sorts of
theoretical ideas and political preferences in mind, and they
have consistently found these kind of sex differences that
I'm talking about. There's no, no sort of realistic
exceptions to the, to the big ones like aggression,
parenting, differences in sexual behavior and the and the
like.
Yeah, but I mean, I think you understand the
worry from some anthropologists when they say that at
least in their understanding when it makes to claiming
or making claims of universal sex differences that Perhaps
we haven't gone through enough, uh, ethnographic or people
haven't looked through enough ethnographic studies to make those
claims, or, or is that something that you don't
think is a plausible argument to make?
I think that they're right that we shouldn't be,
we shouldn't be too confident. Um, BUT the question
is how confident is too confident. I think if
we just had the cultural record, then perhaps we'd
be being too confident in saying, yes, it's, it's
a cross-cultural universal. I think though that because we
also have evidence from other species, we've got very,
very strong theories from evolutionary biology, uh, predicting some
of these differences, uh, theories that have been corroborated
with multiple other species, um, and we've got the
various other lines of evidence as well that I've
mentioned. I think that, you know, we, we should
of course always leave room for doubt. And be
willing to uh say that this is a tentative
conclusion, but I think it's a strong tentative conclusion,
and I think that, I don't think we're being
overconfident to suggest that uh many of these differences
are just part of human nature, rather than uh
creations of some cultures but not others.
Uh, WHEN it comes to cross-species evidence, what kinds
of models, animal models do you think are the
best for us to look at or compare ourselves
to when it comes to studying the the evolutionary
basis of sex differences, because, uh, uh, yeah, let
me just add. When it comes to, for example,
um, discussions or talks I had with primatologists, my
understanding is that, for example, when it comes to
certain differences where we compare sex differences where we
compare ourselves to chimpanzees. THAT there's been some exaggeration
when it comes to their, for example, proclivity toward
aggression and violence, because unfortunately, and this has been
something recognized by people like Jane, the late Jane
Goodall, it seems that a few decades ago, In
certain places in Africa where they studied male aggression,
for example, that it was very much due to
the fact that we were interfering with their ecological
conditions in the sense that we are providing them
with bananas for them to approach the researchers and
then Uh, I mean, the fact that we, uh,
the fact that there would be bananas in their
environment, then they would start fighting for those, for
that resource, for example, and on the other hand,
when it comes to bonobos, it seems that we
are, we have underestimated their rates of Violence and
actually they are more violent than we tended to
believe. So I mean, what do you think are
the best ways for us to approach cross-species evidence
when it comes to sex differences?
Yeah, that's a great question. Um, I think the
way we shouldn't approach it is to say, to
look at any one particular species like chimpanzees, and
say, well, chimps are aggressive, therefore human aggression is
innate, um. Or to say that bonobos are not
aggressive and therefore that challenges the idea that humans
are innately aggressive. I don't think we should do
that, I don't think we should choose any one
species as a model of human beings. I think
the way to use the cross-species uh evidence is
to look for general trends in big groups of
species, uh, and the general kind of thing that
you find is that in species where, Males can
potentially have more offspring than females. Certain kinds of
sex differences uh become common. So basically, where males
can have more offspring than females, any male that
is one of the lucky few that has a
lot of offspring, rather than one of the many
that has few offspring or even no offspring, any
traits that propel that male into that category of
having heaps of kids, those traits are going to
be selected, and those traits include things like uh
aggression. So, um, like male male aggression, males are
more likely to fight each other than females are
likely to fight, uh, one another in these species
where males are, um, where there's competition on the
males to be among the few that have many,
many females, and therefore many, many, um, many, many
offspring inheriting their traits. Um, SO I look like
across the broad swathe of the animal kingdom that,
that we find that tendency. And then we look
at human beings and we say, um, well, we
have that same selection pressure acting on us, it
is the case that men can potentially have more
offspring than children. We know from various sources, genetic
sources, anthropological sources, sociological sources that some men have
always had more offspring than even the most reproductively
prolific women, and therefore there would have been a
selection pressure acting on us. We then find, same
as we do in other species, that males on
average are more aggressive than females are. And it
makes sense in light of the general trend in
the animal kingdom that. That we're part of that
trend, and therefore that the difference has an evolutionary
genesis in our species, just as it does in
in other species. Yeah,
and I think that perhaps other sources of evidence
we can look into, particularly when it comes to
mating, for example, has to do with penis size
and the size of the testicles, right, because I
mean that that. Points to, uh, particularly the size
of the testicles, points to the sperm competition and
perhaps a more more intra-sexual competition in that case,
uh, among males for, uh, female mates,
right. Exactly right, yeah, and that's, you have very
high levels of that chimpanzees and bonobos. So in
terms of their sexual, but not among humans. So
I think in humans we have probably some degree
of sperm competition in our past, but our relative
testicle size is that we, we don't have anything
like what you find among chimps and bonobos. So
in that respect, they're actually very different than us,
and the fact that they're closely related is, uh,
is irrelevant really, um, for testicle size, they're just
not good models for human beings, or they're not
like human beings, um, we're more like, uh, Sort
of socially, we have our testic relative testicle size,
it's more like that of socially monogamous, uh, species
like, like gibbons. So I think probably we're in
that respect, we're a little bit more like them.
Not exactly like them, you know, we, we live
in bigger groups and so there's probably more sperm
competition, there's probably, there's more, you know. Uh, SPLITTING
up and, and, uh, forming different relationships and having
kids with sometimes with multiple partners and, and cheating
and that kind of thing. I don't want to
give the impression that these things are massively common
in our species, but I, but I think that
they are more common than they are in, in
gibbons. But you take my general point, right, is
that we need to look at the specific species,
the specific, um, mating arrangements, and parenting arrangements, um,
and that's more important than looking at the degree
of relatedness, uh, of the species to us.
Mhm. Uh, SO, uh, just to clarify this point,
I think that you've already ended up mentioning these
differences, but what are the most scientifically robust sex
differences that we know of in humans?
Yeah, uh, well, the ones that I'm most persuaded
by are the ones which, um, they have, uh,
3. Uh, YOU know, 3 features Uh, one is
that we've done a ton of research on them
over the last century or so, so they're very
well documented. There are, you know, literally dozens or
hundreds of studies showing the differences. Uh, THE second
thing is I'm most persuaded by ones that are
predicted by well established theories in evolutionary biology. Uh,
SO theories like sexual selection theory and, uh, parental
investment theory and, and sperm compensation theory. Uh, AND
then the third, uh, thing is if, if these,
uh, differences have also been found in other species.
Subject to the same selection pressures as us, that
makes me more confident that they are, Real in
human beings and genuinely shaped at least in part
by natural selection, so, so you know, the examples
would be sex differences in sexual behavior, sex differences
and sexual choosiness, the fact that uh women are
often choosier, or rather females are often choosier than
males about their mates, uh, sex differences in aggression,
risk taking, parenting. I'd say those are the main
ones.
Mhm, uh, BUT I mean, uh, the females tend
to be choosier, but when it comes to mate
selection, uh, I mean, we tend to have that
model of, uh, males compete, females choose, but it
seems that the more correct one is mutual mate
choice.
Or am I wrong? No, no, no, you're right,
I completely agree, um. I wrote a paper on
that exact topic and, and with, with Andrew Thomas,
I think you've had him on the show as
well, right? You've had Andrew, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah,
that's right, yeah, yeah, so we worked on um.
On a paper where we coined those terms, uh,
males compete, females choose, and, uh, the mutual mate
choice model, and the males compete, females choose, uh,
model that characterizes a lot of species, so the
males do most of the competing for mates, the
females do most of the choosiness, the most of
the choosing of mates, um. Doesn't quite apply to
us though, um, and that is because, so, so
you know I mentioned that sex differences emerge out
of, um, the sex difference in terms of the
maximum offspring number. So the fact that males can
have more offspring than females, like the maximum number
for males is higher. Um, THE main reason for
that is because females usually invest more per young,
so per offspring they invest more. Um, WITH mammals,
that's because they're the ones that get pregnant, they're
the ones that give birth, they're the ones that,
that nurse the young, whereas, whereas in principle, all
a male needs to contribute is just the sex
act. Um, NOW, in humans. The theoretical minimum is
that, so theoretically to produce one offspring, females need
to get pregnant, give birth, and until very recently,
they would need to nurse as well for a
few years, whereas the males in principle only need
to, um, Uh, have, have sex with a female.
Uh, THAT'S not the typical, uh, level though, not
the typical level of investment, um, for males. Typically
males invest quite a bit. And when that happens,
the maximum offspring number for males comes down and
gets closer to the maximum offspring number for females.
As it does that. The sex differences in general
get smaller in the species, that's why we have
quite modest sex differences, um, but also what happens
is, because males are forming pair bonds. Like quite
durable pair bonds, and then investing them quite heavily
in the young, they become choosier about their uh
long-term mates, for exactly the same reason that females
are choosy, which is just that um, they're having
fewer offspring and therefore each offspring counts for more.
So they become choosier about their mates, uh, in
that, in that context. Um, AND so it's mutual
mate choice, and both sexes compete for desirable members
of the other sex. Because both are investing, rather
than only the males competing. Mhm
Since we're talking about specific sex differences here, what
do you make of the literature on educational and
occupational sex differences? I mean, uh, at this point
in time, uh, do you think that there's good
enough evidence to say that there's a, An evolutionary
basis, a biological basis to them, or that perhaps
there's more of an environmental input into those differences.
Yeah, there, it's an interesting, it's an interesting puzzle
really, isn't it, because there's no obvious immediate evolutionary
rationale for there being differences in education or occupations,
given that we didn't have schools throughout most of
our, the course of our evolutionary history. And people
weren't studying mathematics and they weren't studying languages and
uh the humanities and sciences and so on. Uh,
AND exactly the same problem with the occupational preferences.
Like, we don't, all our modern occupations are evolutionarily
novel, so why would men and women be inclined
in different directions? It's nowhere near as obvious as
some of the, some of the other, other differences
that we talked about. Um, BUT nonetheless, there are
well established sex differences in both of those domains.
There are educational differences. And occupational differences, so an
educational difference is basically unless women, uh girls rather,
unless girls um, Denied an education They just, they
tend to do at least as well as boys
and often better than boys at school and at
university. Um Other sort of differences, it's not much
of a math step, but, you know, the, the
stereotype is that boys are better at maths, and
there are some, um, some nations where that's the
case, uh, but it's less often the case today
than it used to be. It seems that since
we've educated both sexes, right, right across the board,
including in mathematics, there are some societies, some nations
where you find no difference there, some nations where
you find that women are doing better, that girls
are doing better. So, um, I don't think there's
actually a strong, Innate push there necessarily, that said,
there does seem to be a strong trend where,
among the small minority of people who are particularly
good at mathematics, more of them seem to be
uh male than female. Women on average, and girls
on average, they tend to be uh slightly better
with language. They are, uh, you know, slightly more
gifted verbally than boys, and develop faster verbally. Uh,
SO that's another difference. Um, AND then in terms
of interests, there are interests that appear at school
and then later in, in the occupational sphere. Uh,
THE big one is that, uh, boys and men
on average, are more interested in things and things
related professions. Whereas girls and women on average are
more interested than boys and men in people, and
people related professions and, and helping people. Those differences
are found very, very early, um, like I said,
there's no obvious evolutionary rationale for the occupational preferences
per se, but it does seem that there's, there's
pretty good evidence that they're not 100% due to
socialization, and the evidence is, like, first of all,
They, those differences have been there for as long
as we've been measuring them. We've been measuring them
since the early 1900s, and they have just persisted
right throughout that period. Despite efforts to try to
get more girls and women into traditionally male occupations.
Um, THEY seem to be, there seems to be
a correlation between prenatal hormonal exposure and interest in
things, so, so more testosterone is associated with greater
interest in things within both sexes, um, and, and
like girls who have congenital adrenal hyperplasia, CAH, they're
exposed to high levels of testosterone in the womb,
and they typically, uh, as girls have more, um,
Sort of interest in things related things and things
related topics and less in people related topics, and
as girls, as women, they're more likely to pursue
traditionally male careers. And the final line of evidence
is, is cross cultural. It, the people versus things
difference are, are massively, uh, cross-culturally universal. So the
one study found them in a study of 200,000
participants and found it in 53 out of 53
nations. Another more recent study found that, I looked
at 500,000 people, half a million people, and found
those differences in 80 out of 80 nations, which
is just unprecedented level of cross-cultural uniformity and, and
does point to the idea that probably this is
not just a social, a socialized thing.
Uh, BUT I mean these differences, they are not
huge, right? Or, or are they?
Uh, WELL, they're not huge, um, there's, there's overlap,
but the people versus things difference, that's, um, the
effect size there is about, about 1. Cohen's D
equals 1, and what that means is there's, there's
about 1 standard deviation between the mean for males
versus the mean for females. So that is actually,
that, that, there's still a lot of overlap, um,
so I wouldn't say it's a huge difference, but
I would say that as, as human sex differences
go, that's a, that's a pretty big one. And
maybe, maybe surprisingly big, given that there's no evolutionary
rationale for the difference in the first place. Some
of the other differences I mentioned though are not,
are not so big at all. Um. Women do,
uh, girls and women do better than boys and
men at school and university. Uh, IT'S consistent, but
it's not a massive difference. Girls are somewhat better
with language than boys, it's not a massive difference,
it's, uh, again, it's consistent but not massive. I
would call it a small difference, maybe 0.2 of
a standard deviation between the female mean and the
male mean. There's also 11 to mention is that,
um, On average, boys do slightly better, and men
as well do slightly better on spatial, most spatial
tasks, uh, and depending on the task that spans
between a small difference of about 0.2, in some
cases it's, it's a medium difference of about 0.5.
Occasionally you'll find out an estimate, uh, for like
for mental rotation, for instance, it might be 0.5,
might, might even be as high
as mental rotation of 3D objects, correct.
Exactly, exactly right, yeah, men, men and boys seem
to have a, um, Significant, non-trivial, but also not
huge, uh, advantage there on average, and again, tons
of overlap in all of this.
Uh, BUT I, I mean, I, I was just
going to ask you because this is something that,
uh, people, sometimes people identify as feminists, other times
they don't necessarily identify as feminists, but they, uh,
look at sex differences more from a nurture perspective
or environmental perspective. I mean, do you, do you
think that, uh, there's maybe, or at least to
some extent the risk that Uh, some of these
differences that even we can find cross-culturally that we
are attributing a biological basis to them when perhaps
there would be more of an environmental influence on
them in the sense that, for example, and this
is just an example, of course, uh, I mean,
before the second wave of feminism, particularly in countries
like the US, the UK, and so on. Many
women tended to stay at home. They didn't work
outside the home, and then when they got access
to jobs outside the home and to tertiary education,
I mean, they were, were able to go to
university and so on. That some of the fields
like, for example, that we tended to associate with
males, like for example, being a school teacher, being
a university professor, being a medical doctor, and so
even nurse and so on. I mean those were
male dominated fields, but I mean since women got
access to those. Opportunities over the past few decades,
I mean, they turned things around and now medical
doctors, nurses, school teachers, and so on tend to
be female dominated fields. So I mean what I'm
asking you is, uh, do you think that there's
a possibility that we for some of these differences.
We just haven't given them enough time for them
to uh become smaller and perhaps some of you,
some of it could be as some feminists argue,
uh, the fact that we have inherited, uh, a
patriarchal culture and that perhaps some of it could
be still influencing those differences. I mean, how likely
do you think that is?
Uh, IT'S a great question. Um, AND I do
think that there is, there is a risk there.
Like if people had assumed that all the, all
the occupational sex differences that we saw 50, 100
years ago were due to nature, they would have
been wrong. And, and people did assume that actually,
didn't they? They thought, well, being a doctor is
an inherently male thing, just look at the numbers.
And they were just completely wrong about that. And
as soon as the, uh, doors were, uh, flung
open, uh, women very, very quickly, um, flooded into
basically all fields. They went into all fields, um,
but some of them more than others. Now it
is possible that, uh, That like you say, it's
just a matter of time before some, some, some
of the ones like physics and computer science and
mathematics, where there are nontraditional, you know, there's, there
are a lot of women in those fields, like
a non-trivial, uh, subset of individuals in those fields
are, are women. Um, IS it going to be
the case though that eventually that they will come
to some something closer to parity and it's just
a matter of time? I think it's possible, and
I think that it would be risky to assume
otherwise, just in case doing so, um. It operates
as a self-fulfilling prophecy. It means that women who
might otherwise enjoy going into those areas, uh, don't.
Um, AT the same time, we also need to,
uh, think about the fact that maybe, maybe that's
not the case, and maybe, um, they will just,
As long as the doors are open. Fewer women
than men will go into certain professions, and, and
also uh fewer men than women will go into
others like maybe the health sciences. And that, that
is possibly not just due to socialization and the
weight of history, and, and bias and discrimination, but
it could just reflect. Average differences in men and
women's interests, and uh, And, and, you know, so,
so I do agree that there's a risk in.
Jumping too readily to the conclusion that the way
things are today, reflects nature and it's the way
that, therefore, you know, this reflects people's preferences, but
there is also a risk in the other direction.
So that if we assume that, Average Uh, evolved
sex differences play no role in shaping the occupational
landscape, then we're going to assume that any differences
are direct evidence of bias and discrimination, and we're
going to try to, um, get, get to par,
to, to correct for it exactly. And if that's
wrong, if it's not due to discrimination, or a
big chunk of it is not due to discrimination,
there are costs to doing that. So for instance,
um, If we attribute it all to discrimination, first
of all, we're going to create a lot of
resentment, and if that attribution is, is not correct,
then that is needless resentment, um. It means that
we're going to throw a lot of time and
effort and and money at trying to eliminate the
differences rather than just eliminating bias and barriers, but
eliminating the differences, um, and we're going to be
targeting, Uh, the wrong causes, things that don't actually
explain the gaps, um, it could mean that we
use, um, coercive tactics to try to eliminate the
gaps, um, Because if, if, if it is due
to preferences that are really quite deep seated, then
we're gonna find that, uh, less coercive tactics don't
do the job, you know, they, they, more women
come into a field, but then it sort of
stabilizes, so we're gonna start using coercive, more coercive
tactics, um, Nudges, uh, sort of, uh, bribes, uh,
pushing pressure. Uh, A quota system, for instance. Um,
In doing so, we might actually end up instead
of eliminating discrimination, we may accidentally reverse the direction
of discrimination and end up, and actually there's some
evidence that we are doing this already, when it
comes to hiring, uh, for instance, in STEM fields,
it seems that, Rather than preferring males in the
STEM fields, we prefer females, even if otherwise identical,
um, uh, CVs. Uh, WE tend to have a
bias towards hiring the females these days rather than
the males, which seems like a reversal of the
old, um, of the old bias rather than successfully
having eliminated that bias. Uh, AND then finally, I
guess if we paint a picture of STEM and
other male dominated fields as being. Just hotbeds of
sexism. We run the risk of putting off some
girls and women who might otherwise be very interested
in going into those fields, um, but then just
think, well no, I don't want that, I don't
want to be constantly, uh, Under an onslaught of,
of sexism from these patriarchal males, so they, they
might, we might actually ironically put them off by
um exaggerating the extent to which the differences are,
are due to discrimination. And actually, you know what,
I think there's one other thing I would say,
a good reason for acknowledging the sex differences. Is
that It might help us pitch STEM fields. To,
to women Um, so, like I mentioned, uh, women
on average tend to be less interested in things
than men, more interested in people than men. Um,
BUT a lot of STEM fields that are basically
thing-oriented fields, they actually do involve working with people
and helping people more than we might initially think,
more than the stereotypes suggest. And so if we
were to, to emphasize the ways in which these
jobs involve working with people and helping with helping
people, that could just attract, um, Some women who
would love working in that, in those areas, but
just aren't aware of that.
Mhm. Uh, AND by the way, when it comes
to educational, educational and occupational sex differences, and because
earlier we've also talked about the exaggerators, right? So,
do you think that if people put too much
of an emphasis on uh those sex differences or
them being the result of evolution and having a
biological basis to them. There could be a risk
in the other direction that perhaps I don't know,
let's say that a man has a particular nurturing
kind of psychology and he would like to go
to a field like nursing and or a woman
who tends to be particularly interested in mathematics would
like to go to a field like physics that
if we exaggerate. Those sex differences and put too
much of an emphasis on them that we would
be dissuading those people from making those choices because
they just will think, oh, OK, so I'm a
man, I have, I, I cannot have anything to
do with nursing or I'm a woman. I mean,
I'm not someone who is welcome or or physics
is not for me, something along those lines.
I think there's a major danger of exaggerating the
differences. And also of uh moralizing them, so exaggerating
them, men do this, women do that, but then
moralizing them and thinking men should do that and
men and women shouldn't do that. And I think,
um, yeah, so that's one of the risks of
talking about sex differences, is that people will exaggerate
them. Um, AND I think though what we need
to do about that is Uh, you know, I,
I think we need to talk about sex differences
anyway, even though the risks are real, uh, partly
because it just simply is the case that men
and women differ from each other, and we can't
just lie about that. I think what we need
to do instead, we need to tell the truth
carefully and really emphasize that the exaggerated versions are
exaggerated, that actually men and women aren't identical, but,
They're also not from Mars and Venus. They are,
uh, modestly dimorphic, and that there's tons of overlap,
which means that there are plenty of women who
are much more mathematically inclined than the average man,
and plenty of men who are much more nurturing
than the average woman. We just need to try
to get that right. Uh, AND also the, the
other reason though for talking about sex differences, even
though there are some risks attached with it, is
the fact that, There are also risks and dangers
associated with minimizing sex differences and denying sex differences.
So there's no, no way out of, no, no
way to avoid the risks by just not talking
about one side of the equation. I think the
risks on both sides, and what we really need
to do is just be careful and responsible and
just try to get it right and accurate, and
also respect. Individual differences, uh, respect people's decisions about
what they wanna do with their lives, even if
it's gender atypical.
Mhm. And what are some of, uh, could you
give us some examples of what are the most
modest sex differences? I mean, the ones where there's
all, uh, uh, I mean, lots of overlap and
perhaps in some of them almost complete overlap.
Well, one example is IQ. So the, the best
estimate I think of um the sex difference in
IQ is an effect size of 0. At the
average there's basically no difference. Uh, EXCUSE me. Um,
SO yeah, so no difference. Um, PEOPLE often respond
to that when you say that, people will often
say, hang on a minute, isn't that just because
IQ tests have been designed so that the average
is the same for men and women. And that
is true of some IQ tests, but there are
some where, where it hasn't been designed that way,
and they nonetheless give, Uh, basically equal, um, estimates
of IQ in representative populations. Now there are some
papers that say, oh, actually men have a slightly
higher IQ, but what I think is going on
there is that very, very low IQ men are
more likely to just sort of fall off the
grid and disappear than very, very low IQ women.
So you have fewer of the very lowest IQ
men in the data, in a lot of data
sets. And that means that the, the average for
men goes up slightly, because it's not being pulled
down as much as it, as it should be
if everybody were included in the data, it's not
been pulled down as much as the, the IQ
for, for women. Um, SO, but I think yeah,
when you get representative data, Uh, my reading of
the evidence is that there's, there's just basically no
difference. Um, OTHER small ones, OK, so self-esteem is
one that I find, I find it quite interesting.
Everyone can guess the direction of the self-esteem sex
difference, and, and that is, of course, that on
average men have somewhat higher self-esteem, uh, than men.
I think I would have guessed that that was,
say medium effect size, like a 0.5, uh, Cohen's
D, uh, 0.5, half a standard deviation between the
means, uh, but actually, uh, the best estimates, I
think, put it lower than that, and it's only
about 0.2 effect size. So there is a ton
of overlap there. There were just many, many. Women
who have higher self-esteem than many, many men, uh,
the stereotypes are directionally accurate, but I think they
overstate, they often overstate the difference. Uh, WHAT else,
what are some of the other low ones, uh,
the language sex difference is, is another small one,
about 0.2, um, so again, it's real, people notice
it, but when you see stereotypes like that, Most
women are, are fantastically articulate, whereas most men are
like, uh, as articulate as chimpanzees. That is, that's
not actually, not actually the case, you know. I
mean, for a start, there's a range in both
sexes, uh, but the average difference isn't, isn't huge
either.
Uh, AND, and even, uh, uh, I mean, when
it comes to breaking down, uh, IQ tests into
different kinds of tasks, I mean, sometimes people emphasize
that there are, but you've already mentioned one of
them there, that women tend to score better when
it comes to the more language-related tests and men
tend to score. Better when it comes, and this
is something that you've mentioned already, when it comes
to uh spatial uh kind of intelligence. I mean,
for example, mentally rotating 3D objects, those kinds of
differences, I mean, if I, if I'm reading the
literature correctly, are also not very big or are
they?
That's right, um, they're not, they're not massive. I
think that the, um, the verbal one is pretty
modest. The spatial one depends on the particular task,
but it, it's, um, I would say most of
them are small to medium with a spatial, with
the occasional, um, study will show a larger sex
difference, but that is true, uh, and that is,
That's good news in a way. I mean, it's,
it's good news on just in real in life,
uh, but it's also good news in, in the
sense that this is quite a controversial topic at
the best of times. So it is very good
news that when it comes to cognitive sex differences,
sex differences and specific cognitive abilities, they're very, very
small, they're much smaller than sex differences and sexual
inclinations, uh, sex differences and occupational preferences, those are
quite big cognitive differences. Men and women are much
more alike than different.
Uh, SO, uh, before I move on to another
top, uh, to another topic related to sex differences,
let me just ask you this. Do you think
that the study of sex differences can be compatible
with feminism, and I'm asking you that because, I
mean, usually, not always, but usually, Feminists tend to
prefer a more environmental approach to sex differences, and
they tend to emphasize things like patriarchal culture, the
effects of culture on sex differences or differences between
men and women, but do you think that it
can actually be compatible with feminism or
not? I think it can. It does though depend
exactly what you mean by feminism, and there are
different streams of feminism. To the extent that a
feminist worldview involves, like you say, the view that
sex differences are entirely shaped by, by nurture and
socialization and patriarchy. It is inconsistent with that, an
evolutionary perspective, but by definition, it's inconsistent with that,
and that it just just claims that as important
as those factors might be and in many cases
clearly are, they're not the whole story, and there's
also an an innate push. But there are plenty
of feminists who, Don't hold to a nurture only
view, there are plenty of feminists who think, yeah,
there's, you know, there's an innate nudge as well,
they're, they're quite at ease with evolutionary psychologists, uh,
with the evolutionary psychology, and actually there are plenty
of evolutionary psychologists who call themselves feminists, uh, and
I think like another approach to feminism that is
perfectly compatible with an evolutionary perspective, uh, would be
to say that feminism is the movement which is,
Uh, seeking to, uh, increase fairness for women, to
make things fair for women, and to, um, uh,
fight for women's rights and the like. All of
that is completely compatible with the idea that average
differences between the sexes are not 100% due to
nurture, and my sort of favorite slogan for that
point is to say, uh, that we can treat
men and women equally and fairly, and we can
be just in how we, how we treat them.
Even if average differences between the sexes are not
100% due to socialization.
Mhm. So, I mean, we've been talking a lot
about sex differences, but I actually want to ask
you more about the evolutionary rationale behind them, because
it's one thing to study the, the differences, but
the theory and in this particular case, the evolutionary
theory behind them. It is another, it is a
complete, is a different subject. So, what, what do
you, what would you say is the evolution, the
evolutionary rationale behind sex differences? I mean, evolutionarily speaking,
what is really at the bottom of that?
Well, the main thing I think is the sex
difference and reproductive variance. Um, OR in other words,
the sex difference and the maximum offspring number, uh,
that I mentioned earlier. So in most species, the
average number of offspring per male and per female
has to be the same, as long as the
sex ratio is the same. Uh, BUT the variance
can be greater for one sex or the other.
So in other words, you know, you can have
more. Uh, MORE individuals from one sex have many
offspring, uh, than the other sex, and more at
the other end of the as well having no
offspring or few offspring. Um, NOW usually in most
species, the males have greater variability in offspring number
than the females do. So there are more males
having a ton of offspring, um, than females, and
then more males having no offspring, and where that
is the case, What you have is you have
selection for any trait that is likely to put
an individual male into that category of one of
the lucky few that hits the reproductive jackpot and
has tons of kids, rather than being one of
the, the individuals, the unlucky males that has few
kids or no kids. Um, AND the traits that
that selects for can vary across species. One of
them that, that I mentioned already is male-male aggression.
Um, OR, or, or same-sex aggression, so that's aggression,
either aggression directly, so, so, so males fighting each
other directly for females or males fighting each other
for the status, uh, or the resources or the
territory that are prerequisites for female attention. And that
is stronger in the males than the females, selection
for same-sex aggression is stronger in the males than
the females, because of the fact that males can
potentially have more offspring if their aggression is successful
and they get to the top of the pecking
order. Um, SO I touched on that already, but
another example would be, well, another example would be
that because of the sex difference in maximum offspring
number, uh. Actually, let me just mention before I
go on, why that sex difference exists. The main
reason it exists is because males in on average
in most species, they invest less in their offspring
per offspring than females do. Um, AND for that
reason, they can have. Uh, OFFSPRING with multiple females,
whereas females, uh, can't have offspring with as many
males. But it's not, it's not symmetrical. Uh, GET,
let me get a concrete example to make that
clear.
And does that have, uh, let me just ask
you, does that have to do, uh, at the,
at the basis of it, is it, uh, reproductive
biology, I mean, the fact that, Males, uh, across,
uh, I mean, I guess most species tend to
produce, uh, the smaller gametes, uh, usually sperm and
females tend to produce the larger gametes, usually eggs.
Is that it?
That's the starting place, um, but it's actually more
parental investment overall. So if, so in species where
they only produce sperm and eggs, that's the extent
of parental investment. And that's what determines the differences.
But for species like ourselves, sperms and eggs are
just a tiny part of the contribution to, to
the offspring, and they're, they're greatly, they're overwhelmed by
other forms of parental investment, uh, like pregnancy, parturition,
and, uh, and nursing the young. Um, THOSE are
all physio like reproductive, they're built into reproductive physiology,
and they mean, for instance, that, um, that a
man who had to have, say, 3 sexual partners
in a year could potentially have 3 offspring at
the end of that. Uh, WHEREAS, uh, a woman
that had a woman that had 3 sexual partners
in a year, probably gonna have no more offspring
than she would if she just had 1 sexual
partner. Um, AND so that creates a selection pressure
on males. To uh seek multiple mates, and so,
and so that's another, um, consequence of the sex
difference in the maximum offspring number, is that males
are often going to be selected, and often are
selected in many species to seek multiple mates to
a greater extent than females are. We see that
in their own species, uh we see that in
many others as well. And then another difference is
that um because Males invest less Females invest more
and females are often choosier about their mates. And
for that reason, they select males for signs of
signs of health and vigor, good genes perhaps, other
things like that. So males evolve to, uh, basically
to show off to females, either behaviorally or with,
you know, the peacock's tail, that's the classic example
of a way in which, uh, a male evolves
to try to seduce the females with this fantastic
tail that he has this colorful, ornately patterned tail,
uh, and the females choose it on the basis
of that tail which male they want to mate
with. Uh, AND in our own species, we see,
I would say that, you know, again, both sexes
choose, so both sexes compete for mates and both
sexes kind of show off. To try to attract
the eye of the other sex, but I think
it's fair to say, and I don't think most
people disagree with me about this, uh, that, that
men tend to do more of the showing off
than women do, and the more extreme forms of,
of the showing off, uh, which fits quite nicely
with evolutionary predictions. So yeah, so that's, so the
evolutionary rationale is basically maximum offspring number, sex differences,
maximum offspring number, due to parental investment, there's a
whole cluster of different sex differences. In fact, most
of the sex differences that we've been talking about.
Yeah, that bit about the showing off, let me
ask you a little bit more about it because
I, I find it curious, uh, because, I mean,
of course, Uh, I'm, uh, I don't think that's
necessarily a human universal what I'm going to say
next, because, for example, in our more, uh, Western
industrialized societies, uh, women tend to be the ones
who use makeup, for example, right, and use more,
uh, let's say body ornamentation, but of course I'm
saying that is. It is probably not a human
universal because there are lots and lots of traditional
societies where men do lots of body painting and
body ornamentation. So, uh, uh, in those societies, it
goes the other way around. But, uh, what, what
do you mean exactly by men doing more showing
off than women? In, in what ways do you
think that is?
Um, QUITE a few ways, but, but let me
address the, um, the body ornamentation piece first. I
think that's the big exception really to this rule
that males tend to do more of the showing
off. Is that when it comes to physical appearance,
um, women tend to do more of it. It's
a very interesting exception, I think, to the rule.
Um, WHEN it comes to physical attractiveness and ornamentation,
it seems that, uh, the females in, in our
species have reversed the usual trend, and they, they
have the bigger peacock's tail. Um, And I do
think that that is a cross-cultural universal when it
comes to Uh, like the daily. Daily ornamentation as
opposed to ornamentation on special occasions. So there was
a study recently, for instance, um, of I think
it was 90 nations, and they found in every
single nation that women spend more time trying to
enhance their appearance than men do, even though both
sexes do it. Um, WOMEN did it, did it
more in every case. And then, yeah, when, oh,
so, so perhaps when I was mentioning earlier in
traditional societies or some of them men using body
paint, I mean, perhaps that is for special occasions
or special rituals when they go to war and
so on.
Uh, YEAH, I think it might be both of
those things separately. So I think there are, um,
I'm actually picturing, as you talk about the body
ornamentation and the men, I'm picturing. An African group,
uh, tribal group, I can't think of the name
of it, but the men are all painted in
red, and on special occasions they do, they jump
up and down and do these impressive physical feats
trying to attract, uh, women. Um, AND I think
the war painters may be a different thing where
they're trying to dress up and hype themselves up
and scare the other side. Yeah, yeah, sure, yeah.
Uh, SO, but, yes, as far as I know,
and anthropologists have, at least some of them have
claimed this as well, that it's, that it's a
general trend that the women generally spend more time
on, on their appearance, and, um, and I argue
in the book actually that it's not just about
ornamentation, that actually because men place more weight and,
and good looks in a long-term mate, that actually
women in our species have evolved to be better
looking. Um, SO in terms of their physical appearance,
they really do have a larger peacock's tail. Uh,
SO that, that, but that's going in the opposite
direction to what I would say is the general
trend, the showing off trend, where I, I think
that men are a lot more concerned about status
and broadcasting status, and I think that that is,
uh, like a big part of that is the
fact that women place more weight than men on
status in a long-term mate, status and resources in
a long-term mate. And so they put men under
selection pressure throughout our history. For two things, one,
a motivation to attain status and to broadcast status.
Um, YEAH, well, to do those two things, they
put men under selection to do that. Um, SO
yeah, uh, the specifics of the showing off vary
from culture to culture. Uh, SO in some cultures,
and, and some subcultures within a given nation, for
instance, it might mean you can dress up in
a really nice suit with a very expensive looking
tie and convey, I, I, I earn the big
bucks, um. It might mean picking up a guitar
and trying to learn how to play songs that
are going to impress people. It might mean, uh,
picking up a skateboard and trying to get really,
really good with, uh, doing fancy moves on the,
on the skateboard, uh, it can involve sort of
risk taking, uh, just, just all sorts of things,
I think, um. It is interesting that there's a
great example I think of something we touched on
earlier, which is that at the level of the
specifics, you just have a ton of cross-cultural variability
and variability within cultures and across times, um, but
at a, at a deeper level, it does all
seem to come out of the fact that men
seem more desperate to master something and broadcast how
cool they are and how high status they are
to the world.
Yeah, even though I imagine that nowadays we have
to be a little bit more careful with honest
signaling because I mean, we can rent a nice
suit, we can rent a nice car, you know.
Yeah, and, and I, I think you're absolutely right,
and I wonder if actually that changes what signals
people pay the most attention to. Like it seems
to me, I was actually thinking as I was
talking about suits as a status display, I was
thinking, I don't think that that is as much
of a status display these days as it might
used to have been. Yeah, well, your social circle
as well, but, yeah, yeah.
OK, so let me just ask you about sexual
selection because I would imagine that sexual selection from
an evolutionary standpoint also has played and plays a
big role in driving the evolution of sex differences.
So, is it, is it possible for us to
really distinguish between, uh, the role. THAT intersex competition
versus intersex selection might have played in driving sex
differences. I mean, is it possible for us to
know how much of it has been the result
of competition within sex or intersex selection?
Sometimes it is, I think sometimes it's a, the
lines are a bit blurry, and I think actually
that there are some traits that are favored by
both forms of, of selection, by mate choice and
uh same-sex um competition. I guess that's sometimes it's
pretty clever. So I do think sometimes it's clear,
I do think that, hm, what's an example? I
would say aggression in humans, in human beings is
pretty clearly a product of intersexual selection rather than
intersexual selection. So in other words, aggression is, is
about competition between males rather than aggression as a
way to try to impress females. And the reason
I say that is that often females, this is,
this isn't just humans actually, there are quite a
few species where the females don't actually seem to
like the aggression, they don't seem to just, They
don't see a fight and then just fall for
the winner and think that that winner's so hot,
the way that he beat up that other person.
So I think it's more likely that that is
about same-sex competition for status and rank and resources,
and that, but that is the status and rank,
that is what females are, are interested in rather
than aggression per se. Um, AND in some traits
like the peacock's tail, I don't think that plays
a big role in terms of male-male competition. They,
they have leg spurs though, so they do actually
fight, the males fight each other as well. And
I think the leg spurs kind of like built-in
knives on their legs. Basically, I think those are
products of intersexual selection, but that um the tail
itself is almost completely a product of intersexual selection,
so, um, the fact that the females like them,
and uh, and they choose the male based on
the impressiveness of their tail. Uh, IN humans, I
think a lot of traits like male upper body,
uh, Upper body strength, yeah, exactly, and muscularity, um,
I think that those, it's pretty good evidence and
arguments that those are largely a product of intrasexual
selection, um, because they tend to be more threatening
to other males than they are attractive to females,
but they are also often quite attractive to females,
so they're probably they're they're a product of both.
Um, BUT maybe more intra than intersexual selection. And
then a lot of women's, uh, secondary sexual features
like, you know, uh, breasts and, uh, the, um,
hourglass shape, things like those that appear at puberty,
those are largely products, I think of intersexual selection.
So in other words, a, a male mate choice,
rather than being about intersexual conflict among females.
Yeah, I don't know if you would agree with
me, but I think that particularly when it comes
to the male body, I mean, what attracts women,
it seems to me that it tends to be
not so much the trait itself, but more the
sense that the trait is a proxy to status
because for, for example, in the 60s, 70s, there
There were lots of, I, I, I mean, I,
I think that the majority of them were like
this, that many er famous musicians were really, really,
really skinny and female female females were very attracted
to them, but it's, uh, I, er, but it
was because er er that was a signal of
their status as musicians, as people who probably have
lots. Of social status, lots of money, and so
on. And nowadays, perhaps with this trend of, for
example, male actors being more muscular in terms of
their upper body, perhaps the muscularity is more of
a proxy to those same kinds of things like
social status, money, and so on. I mean, would
you agree with that, or
maybe, let me think. Um, THE only counterargument I
can think of. Is that, I think it's possible
that women are interested in a whole bunch of
different things, and, and men as well, um. So
they're interested in status, interested in resources, but also
interested in physical attractiveness. And I guess it's possible
that those 60s and 70s scrawny rock stars might
have been, might have been even more attractive if
they'd been a little healthier looking and didn't have
the sort of druggy look or whatever it was,
you know, um, they're just spending all their nights
out partying look. Um, AND, and yeah, so possibly.
They found them attractive despite their scrawliness rather than
because of it. And uh yeah, and. Yeah, it's
interesting, isn't it? It's the fact that Women can
be attracted to scrawny guys and quite muscular guys,
I guess it does suggest that, I mean obviously
they do, obviously women just like men have physical
preferences. But I guess unless they're really extreme, like
extreme muscularity, I don't think is considered too attractive
because it's too out of the norm, and extreme
scoringness I'm sure would not be attractive either. Yeah,
and extreme muscularity also at a from a certain
point on it becomes the body becomes sort of
dysmorphic, right? I mean, it doesn't, it doesn't look
good at all and sometimes it doesn't even look
like, uh, oh my God, what's that kind of
trait that people always like in terms of the
body as symmetry. It doesn't look symmetric.
Yeah, yeah, true, yeah. Um, BUT within the normal
range, within quite a wide range, it seems like
it's not a, a deal breaker to be, to
be some, you know, it seems to be quite
a wide range of acceptable. Healthy-ish kind of bodies,
and yeah, especially it was trumped by other things
like uh wealth and status and, Playing cool guitar
licks.
Yeah, so, uh, let me just, uh, when it
comes to mating, I mean, we've already gone through
most of it, but there's another aspect that you
also tackle in your book that has to do
with, uh, preference for people from a particular kind
of, uh, age bracket. OR not necessarily age bracket,
but them being younger or older than you. So,
and in the book you make the claim that
men prefer younger women, whereas, whereas women prefer older
men, but not always. So could you explain that?
Uh, THAT'S right. And actually, you know, that, those,
the sex difference in age preferences is actually quite
a big sex difference as, as human sex differences
go. And yeah, so for people, for men and
women and their. In the twenties, Uh, early to
mid-twenties in particular, that's where most of the research
has been done. The general finding is that men
do tend to prefer somebody a couple of years
younger, whereas women do tend to prefer someone, About
their own age or maybe a couple of uh
couple of years older, um. But that's not always
the case, and the exceptions to that rule, I
think actually point quite nicely to the validity of
the evolutionary explanation for these differences in the first
place. Um, SO what you find is among teenage
boys, they're not actually most attracted to, to girls
who are younger than them. So if they're like
16, they're not most attracted to 14-year-old girls, they're
more attracted to women who are older than themselves.
So women, women in their early 20s, um. Which,
which the key thing here is that that's the
age of peak fertility uh in females, and the
physical features that men typically find the most attractive
are those associated with fertility. Um, Now what happens
is that And that's actually true for both sexes,
is that both sexes find traits associated with youthfulness
to be, to be attractive, but men place more
of an emphasis on youthfulness than women do, and
the evolutionary rationale for that is that women but
not men, have menopause. So women have a narrower
window of fertility than men do. And men place
more emphasis on youthfulness in a mate than women
do, because youthfulness is more key to female fertility
in women than in men. So yeah, so yeah,
so it's a stronger emphasis on youthful traits, um,
now as people get older, uh, moving through their
life in their 20s, 30s, 40s, 50s, uh, it's
not the case that, that men, Always would prefer
a mate who's in the, who's in her early
twenties. Um, THE purely physical features that they might
find the most attractive, maybe those associated, they are
those associated with women in their early twenties. But,
uh, we don't just choose mates based on, on
looks, contrary to the stereotypes of men, uh, there
are very few who only choose on the basis
of looks. Looks are part of it, but also
compatibility is very, very important as well. People tend
to be more compatible with people of their own
age, they have more, more in common with them.
So what seems to happen is that as men
get older and older and older, the um age
of their ideal mate gets older as well. But
The age of the ideal mate doesn't go up
as fast as their own age does, and it
seems to be the, the age of the ideal
mate is like a compromise between the age of
peak physical fertility and their own age, sort of
somewhere in the middle. Um, WITH women on the
other hand, as they get older, they. Just continue
to prefer somebody of roughly their own age, you
know, that there's a range of some somewhat older
than themselves to a slightly younger. Within that range,
the average is slightly older than themselves, but it
is not, uh, not massively discrepant. And, and let
me just add that I think, um, when people
hear about this, they sometimes think that it's just,
Uh, wishful thinking on the part of older guys
who just think, oh yeah, you know, women like
older guys, this is great. Um. Uh, AND that's
not the case, right, so it's not the case
that women are primarily attracted to older guys, let
alone old men. You know, if it were, you'd
look at their, at, uh, teenagers, teenage girls, bedroom,
uh, walls, and they would post up pictures of,
you know, politicians or, or older guys rather than
boy bands. They, they tend to prefer someone of
around their own age. Um, SOMETIMES you do get
pairings where you have a, an older guy with
a much younger woman, but I think when that
happens, that's usually, uh, despite the guy's age, rather
than because of his age. It's usually because he's
got other stuff going on, like wealth and status.
Could it be that, for example, the fact that
some guys and I mean we can see lots
of that in the porn industry now with the
MILF category. I mean, since the release of American
Pie in 1999, I mean, it became a thing.
I mean, could it be the case that perhaps
what we tend to associate with the MILF cat.
Category and guys feeling attracted to some older women
has to do with the fact that many of
them, the thing is not that they are older,
but that they look younger than they really are.
I mean, because many of them actually retain some
of these more neotenous features, right, even in their,
even in their 40s sometimes.
Yeah, agreed. I think that is a big part
of it. I think that, uh, our lifestyles these
days are in many ways cushier than they used
to be. So, a 40 year old man or
woman today, woman or man, is probably going to
look, uh, younger than a lot of 30-year-olds or
maybe, I don't know, maybe even 20-year-olds in hunter-gatherer
times. So you look younger because of cushier lifestyles.
Um, ALSO, a lot of MILFs, I read somewhere
that, um, the average age of women who classify
themselves as MLFs, it's, it's actually surprisingly young, it's
not actually, like 40s is relatively uncommon. Um, IT'S
more likely to be in the 30s, I think,
you know, maybe even the, maybe even the late
20s. Uh, SO yeah, so I think it's really
about, it's not the, it's not about the age
per se, it's about features statistically associated with age
throughout most of our evolutionary history. And, and yeah,
a lot of, uh, older, older women. Who are
still found very attractive, it's because they still retain
those features and, and also there's cosmetics and cosmetic
surgery, and then I guess on top of all
of that, I think that, uh, a lot of
the women who go into that kind of work
or who are considered very, very attractive models or
actresses, They're atypically attractive anyway, so, um, so that's
sort of, that trumps a lot of,
uh, yeah, some of it, some of it perhaps
is even genetics.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, exactly. Mhm.
OK, so I have just two more topics that
I would like to discuss with you and, uh,
I mean one of them has to do with
how we should deal with all of these in
terms of how we approach gender roles, but Before
that, er, what do you make or how do
you approach er intersex people or people with differences
of er sexual development, trans people, and non-binary people?
I mean, generally speaking, people who tend to or
apparently fall outside of the sex or gender binary.
Yeah, um, it's an interesting topic, right? And I
think it's one where, um, a lot more research
is needed. I touched on it in the book,
but I don't say too much about it. And
really, the reason for that is that there's, there's
not a heap of evidence on the topic. Um,
I discussed same-sex sexual orientation in some depth, because
there is quite a bit of research there. But
yeah, what I, what I think's going on. Uh,
ONE of the things going on with trans and
non, non-binary individuals is that, well, I think there
are some. Biological males who are somewhat shifted in
a, in a more typically feminine direction, and some
biological females who are um somewhat shifted in a
more masculine, uh, direction, and that's probably, I would,
I would say probably due to sex atypical prenatal
hormonal exposure. And some of those individuals who are
shifted in that kind of atypical direction. Would just
see themselves as being feminine men or masculine women,
um, but some on the other hand, Identify with
the other sex instead, or, or don't identify with
either sex and would classify themselves as being um
non-binary.
Yeah, because, because during intrauterine development, the brain can
develop independent from, uh, the other, uh, the goal
nuts, for example, right, and the uh for example,
the, the um, The regions of the brain which
we know tend to develop in somewhat sexual dimorphic
ways in certain people, they can develop, uh, for
example, even if they have male. Genitalia and produce
male gametes and have male gonads, their brain can
develop in the opposite direction when it comes to
the structures that tend to influence gender identity.
That's exactly right. And, you know, at least to
some degree, they can be shifted in that direction,
and that's just because, uh, the time period within
the womb where, uh, Sexual differentiation of the brain
takes place is difficult, is uh different from when
uh other aspects of sexual differentiation take place, um,
so, so yeah, so I think that's probably a
big part of what's going on. And I think
that, uh, so those are the facts, right? Um,
THEN there's the ethical question, and, uh, the ethical
question for me, I just think people should be,
people should be able to just live the lives
that they wanna live and lead, uh, and, and
identify the way that they want to identify, and
of course not be mistreated, uh, because just because
they identify in an atypical way, um, that's not
any great hot take, I think a lot of
people have that view. But I'm just saying I,
I completely agree with them on that. Um, NOW
in terms of intersex people, that's slightly different. That's
when you have a, a mixture of male typical
and female typical traits, uh, like physically that come
about. So, so some people have argued that the,
um, trans people and maybe, um, non-binary people are
psychologically intersex. Um, YEAH, but, but they're not intersex
in the traditional sense of the term and that
they don't have, um, ambiguous physical features.
Mhm. Yeah, because people who we tend to call
intersex, that in the medical field nowadays we call
people with differences of sexual development, uh, many times,
uh, they tend to have ambiguous primary sexual characteristics,
right?
Yeah, indeed, yeah, it's just, uh, intersex people in
that sense are a sort of subset of people
with, um, uh, Disorders or differences of, of, uh,
sexual development. Mhm.
OK, so one final question and I guess that
you've already at least part, partly answered it, but,
uh, toward the end of your book, you talk
about three different, uh, sort of gender role approaches
that we can have to all of these differences.
I mean, you talk about gender role traditionalism. Which
I think it's pretty much self-explanatory and gender role
progressivism and gender role individualism, but I, I mean,
uh, explain a little bit each of them, and
uh I mean, in your opinion, I mean, do
you have a preference for any of them, or
do you think that one of them is more
ethical than the others? How do you approach this
question?
Sure, so the, so those are the three different
ways that I stake out that we can potentially
react to, uh, sex differences in society, uh, and,
and actually even in our individual lives. So the
first one, gender role traditionalism, is the idea that
men and women are, are very different, and they're
very, very different by nature. And not only that,
they should be. So they are different and they
should be different, and if men and women, Start
straying away from the traditional gender roles that have
been bequeathed to us by God or by nature,
we should try to correct that, in exactly the
same way that if somebody breaks their arm, we
would try to correct that by putting their arm
in a cast. Um, GENDER role progressivism is the
view that most sex differences are almost completely due
to discrimination or sexist socialization, and therefore that in
an ideal society, we would expect and hope that
they would just disappear completely, and, and that's what
we should try to do, we should try to
get rid of sex differences or maybe even reverse
them to make up for past roles. And then
the third approach is gender role individualism, which is
that, We shouldn't take a stand on the gender
outcomes. We shouldn't be aiming for massive differences or
or getting rid of differences. We should just instead,
um, get rid of bias and barriers, try to
create, to the extent that we can, try to
create an even playing field. But then let the,
the gender gaps and sex differences and sex similarities
set themselves as a result of different individuals making
informed choices about what they most want to do
with their lives. Um, NOW, the way I've described
that, I think it's gonna be pretty obvious to
everybody that I do have a preference,
and it's, it's the leather one.
Exactly, exactly right, yeah. That is the one that
I prefer. And, and that's the one that I
think is the most ethical approach, and I think
it's the most ethical, because I think it's the
way that is most conducive to increasing individual happiness
and also people's freedom. You know, so I do,
one thing I don't like about either of the
other two. Is they seem to be trying to
make decisions. You know, about what other people should
do with their lives. So in one case they're
trying to push people into gender roles, and in
another case they're trying to push them out of
them, whereas I would much prefer to just really
try to give, empower everybody to make the decisions
that suit them best, and then it's just up
to them what they do and we'll just let
the cards fall where they may. And some sex
differences may be bigger and some maybe smaller and
it just doesn't matter. What matters is that people,
um, are not subject to unfair treatment or bias
and that they uh have the, the resources to
try to make up their life what they want
to make.
Also, I think that both general traditionalism and general
progressivism are not very accommodating of variability even within
men and within women, because I mean, general traditionalism
for very obvious reasons, I mean, is not very
accommodating for, I mean, more masculine women or more
feminine men or and even trans people, non-binary people,
and so on, and gender progressive. I mean, sometimes
it seems like any kind of difference between men
and women, and I guess even to some extent
variability with, particularly within women, because I mean some
women might be more conservative, others more progressive, and
so on, that many times it's also not very
accommodating to that sort of more I guess political
variability.
I completely agree, and that's one of the things
I like best about gender or individualism, um, is
the fact that I, I just think it's the
most tolerant approach. Tolerant of individuals, it says it's
completely fine if you buck the trend, and if
you're very, very different than the, the average man
or the average woman. But, but it's also completely
fine. If you don't buck the trend, and you
just fall in with the traditional ways, that's fine
too, whatever, whatever suits you best. Yeah. As long
as it doesn't harm other people. Sorry, just an
extra thought, as long as it doesn't harm other
people, you know, I think, um, and as long
as it's, as long as the differences are not
a product of injustice or mistreatment, and as long
as they don't, they don't create harm, I think
we should basically let, live and let live and
let people be themselves. My favorite example of where
we shouldn't do that so much concerns male violence.
So male violence, there's an obvious sex difference there.
But male violence is the cause of a lot
of completely unnecessary suffering in the world, and so
I think for that reason, even though it's perfectly
natural, we have every reason to try to seek
unnaturally low levels of male violence. And, and in
doing that, we're going to shrink the sex difference.
But the problem with aggression, it's not the sex
difference that is the problem, it's the violence that
is the problem, and um, what we should be
aiming to do is reduce harm, increase freedom, and
the effect that has on sex differences, well, you
know, what whatever effect it is, it doesn't matter.
Uh, WHAT, what matters is harm and freedom rather
than getting rid of sex differences or magnifying sex
differences. Yeah.
OK, great. So, let's end on that note, Doctor
Stuart Williams. It's been a great conversation and the
book is again, a billion Years of Sex Differences,
how evolution. The minds of men and women. There
is the cover in case people are interested in
buying the printed version of it. So Dr. Stuart
Williams, thank you so much for doing this. And
by the way, apart from the book, would you
like to tell people where they can find you
and your work on the internet? Yes,
and thank you as well, uh, Ricardo. That was
great. I really, really enjoyed that conversation. Other than
the book, you can find me in uh two
places. My favorite place at the moment is, is
sub stack, and I have a sub stack called
the Nature nurture, Nietzsche newsletter. So you can find
that, you can Google Nature, nurture, Nietzsche, or you
can just Google my name. I think it's one
of the 1st, 1st things that comes up is
my, my sub stack page. Uh AND also I'm
on Twitter, and my Twitter handle is at Steve
Stewwill. So at Steve S T E V E
S T U W I L L. You me,
Dave as well.
Oh, and by the way, I will, of course,
also link to our first interview about your other
book, The Ape That Understood the Universe, which is
also very fascinating, fascinating, and thank you so much
for taking the time to come on the show
again. It's been really fun to talk with you.
Yeah,
thank you, Ricardo.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inasi Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarinth, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alec Baka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov,
Zal Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall, Eddin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel Pan
Scortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony
Smith, and Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg
Jarno, Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin,
David Williams, Di Acosta, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex
Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D.
Lee Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber,
Robert Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix,
Mark Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly
Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson,
Ismael Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate
Van Goler, Alexander Ebert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali
Mohammadi, Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David
Pinsov, Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A
special thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank
Lucas Stinnik, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller,
Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro,
Al Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my
executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and
Rosie. Thank you for all.